---
layout: default
saying: Try it, try it, Sam I Am!
---

# Git for Scientists

This is created for Software Carpentry's WISE bootcamp, 14 Apr 14.

[Software Carpentry's
lessons](http://swcarpentry.github.io/2014-04-14-wise/novice/git/)
are a good intro if you want to read ahead.

## What is git?

Git is a version control system. It's the current top-of-the-line one,
used by programmers and conscientious people everywhere.

## What is version control?

Version control tracks changes in files over time. It keeps the
progression of a project, trackably, without cluttering the filesystem.

Version control is like saved games. Use it to mark any point you might
want to come back to. Use it to see what changed, when.

In addition, version control coordinates changes to the same files by
many people. Use it to collaborate without overwriting team members'
work.

## Why do I care?

Version control is essential for reproducibility of results. You can get
back to any version of your code. You can see who changed what, and
when, and (with good practice) why. You can give other people access to
see or change your files without fear that they'll overwrite anything
you needed.

That's the excuse, the external reason to use git. The day-to-day reason
is: it provides safety and lets us experiment. Save something, make
changes, and always know you can change your mind. Track what you did.

Other benefits:
   * easy and fast backups.
   * everyone can work at the same time, on separate computers, with no locking.

## What's the downside?

Long-term, the downside is a bit of extra work, a few extra commands to
type a few times per day. There's some extra brainspace required there.

Setup is easier than any other version control system. You do need to
decide whether to backup or share your repository.
You'll also want to figure out the git integration in your favorite
development tools.

Short-term, learning git is tough. The concepts in it are new, but
interesting. The commands to do things are new, and not as easy as I
wish they could be. But that's why you're here!

# Outline

We have all afternoon to learn this. The goal is, before you leave today
you know how to use git locally to save multiple versions of files, and
to collaborate with a central repository at Bitbucket or Github.

We'll start with the concepts behind git and how it organizes the
versions of files internally. Then we'll create a local repository, save
some changes, and get back to old versions. After the break, we'll
backup our repository to Bitbucket, and then learn how to collaborate
with each other.


